P.S 369 da yeni hikaye


One morning, just as I was about to set off to my office, Agrafena, my cook, washerwoman and housekeeper, came in to me and, to my surprise, entered into conversation.

She had always been such a silent, simple creature that, except her daily inquiry about dinner, she had not uttered a word for the last six years. I, at least, had heard nothing else from her.

"Here I have come in to have a word with you, sir," she began abruptly; "you really ought to let the little room."

"Which little room?"

"Why, the one next the kitchen, to be sure."

"What for?"

"What for? Why because folks do take in lodgers, to be sure."

"But who would take it?"

"Who would take it? Why, a lodger would take it, to be sure."

"But, my good woman, one could not put a bedstead in it; there wouldn't be room to move! Who could live in it?"

"Who wants to live there! As long as he has a place to sleep in. Why, he would live in the window."

"In what window?"

"In what window! As though you didn't know! The one in the passage, to be sure. He would sit there, sewing or doing anything else. Maybe he would sit on a chair, too. He's got a chair; and he has a table, too; he's got everything."

"Who is 'he' then?"

[2]

"Oh, a good man, a man of experience. I will cook for him. And I'll ask him three roubles a month for his board and lodging."

After prolonged efforts I succeeded at last in learning from Agrafena that an elderly man had somehow managed to persuade her to admit him into the kitchen as a lodger and boarder. Any notion Agrafena took into her head had to be carried out; if not, I knew she would give me no peace. When anything was not to her liking, she at once began to brood, and sank into a deep dejection that would last for a fortnight or three weeks. During that period my dinners were spoiled, my linen was mislaid, my floors went unscrubbed; in short, I had a great deal to put up with. I had observed long ago that this inarticulate woman was incapable of conceiving a project, of originating an idea of her own. But if anything like a notion or a project was by some means put into her feeble brain, to prevent its being carried out meant, for a time, her moral assassination. And so, as I cared more for my peace of mind than for anything else, I consented forthwith.

"Has he a passport anyway, or something of the sort?"

"To be sure, he has. He is a good man, a man of experience; three roubles he's promised to pay."

The very next day the new lodger made his appearance in my modest bachelor quarters; but I was not put out by this, indeed I was inwardly pleased. I lead as a rule a very lonely hermit's existence. I have scarcely any friends; I hardly ever go anywhere. As I had spent ten years never coming out of my shell, I had, of course, grown used to solitude. But another ten or fifteen years or more of the same solitary existence, with the same Agrafena, in the same bachelor quarters, was in truth a somewhat cheerless prospect. And therefore a new inmate, if well-behaved, was a heaven-sent blessing.[3]

Agrafena had spoken truly: my lodger was certainly a man of experience. From his passport it appeared that he was an old soldier, a fact which I should have known indeed from his face. An old soldier is easily recognised. Astafy Ivanovitch was a favourable specimen of his class. We got on very well together. What was best of all, Astafy Ivanovitch would sometimes tell a story, describing some incident in his own life. In the perpetual boredom of my existence such a story-teller was a veritable treasure. One day he told me one of these stories. It made an impression on me. The following event was what led to it.

I was left alone in the flat; both Astafy and Agrafena were out on business of their own. All of a sudden I heard from the inner room somebody—I fancied a stranger—come in; I went out; there actually was a stranger in the passage, a short fellow wearing no overcoat in spite of the cold autumn weather.

"What do you want?"

"Does a clerk called Alexandrov live here?"

"Nobody of that name here, brother. Good-bye."

"Why, the dvornik told me it was here," said my visitor, cautiously retiring towards the door.

"Be off, be off, brother, get along."

Next day after dinner, while Astafy Ivanovitch was fitting on a coat which he was altering for me, again some one came into the passage. I half opened the door.

Before my very eyes my yesterday's visitor, with perfect composure, took my wadded greatcoat from the peg and, stuffing it under his arm, darted out of the flat. Agrafena stood all the time staring at him, agape with astonishment and doing nothing for the protection of my property. Astafy Ivanovitch flew in pursuit of the thief and ten minutes later came back out of breath and empty-handed. He had vanished completely.[4]

"Well, there's a piece of luck, Astafy Ivanovitch!"

"It's a good job your cloak is left! Or he would have put you in a plight, the thief!"

But the whole incident had so impressed Astafy Ivanovitch that I forgot the theft as I looked at him. He could not get over it. Every minute or two he would drop the work upon which he was engaged, and would describe over again how it had all happened, how he had been standing, how the greatcoat had been taken down before his very eyes, not a yard away, and how it had come to pass that he could not catch the thief. Then he would sit down to his work again, then leave it once more, and at last I saw him go down to the dvornik to tell him all about it, and to upbraid him for letting such a thing happen in his domain. Then he came back and began scolding Agrafena. Then he sat down to his work again, and long afterwards he was still muttering to himself how it had all happened, how he stood there and I was here, how before our eyes, not a yard away, the thief took the coat off the peg, and so on. In short, though Astafy Ivanovitch understood his business, he was a terrible slow-coach and busy-body.

"He's made fools of us, Astafy Ivanovitch," I said to him in the evening, as I gave him a glass of tea. I wanted to while away the time by recalling the story of the lost greatcoat, the frequent repetition of which, together with the great earnestness of the speaker, was beginning to become very amusing.

"Fools, indeed, sir! Even though it is no business of mine, I am put out. It makes me angry though it is not my coat that was lost. To my thinking there is no vermin in the world worse than a thief. Another takes what you can spare, but a thief steals the work of your hands, the sweat of your brow, your time ... Ugh, it's nasty! One can't speak of it! it's too vexing. How is it you don't feel the loss of your property, sir?"

"Yes, you are right, Astafy Ivanovitch, better if the thing[5] had been burnt; it's annoying to let the thief have it, it's disagreeable."

"Disagreeable! I should think so! Yet, to be sure, there are thieves and thieves. And I have happened, sir, to come across an honest thief."

"An honest thief? But how can a thief be honest, Astafy Ivanovitch?"

"There you are right indeed, sir. How can a thief be honest? There are none such. I only meant to say that he was an honest man, sure enough, and yet he stole. I was simply sorry for him."

"Why, how was that, Astafy Ivanovitch?"

"It was about two years ago, sir. I had been nearly a year out of a place, and just before I lost my place I made the acquaintance of a poor lost creature. We got acquainted in a public-house. He was a drunkard, a vagrant, a beggar, he had been in a situation of some sort, but from his drinking habits he had lost his work. Such a ne'er-do-weel! God only knows what he had on! Often you wouldn't be sure if he'd a shirt under his coat; everything he could lay his hands upon he would drink away. But he was not one to quarrel; he was a quiet fellow. A soft, good-natured chap. And he'd never ask, he was ashamed; but you could see for yourself the poor fellow wanted a drink, and you would stand it him. And so we got friendly, that's to say, he stuck to me.... It was all one to me. And what a man he was, to be sure! Like a little dog he would follow me; wherever I went there he would be; and all that after our first meeting, and he as thin as a thread-paper! At first it was 'let me stay the night'; well, I let him stay.

"I looked at his passport, too; the man was all right.

"Well, the next day it was the same story, and then the third day he came again and sat all day in the window and stayed the night. Well, thinks I, he is sticking to me; give him food and drink and shelter at night, too—here am I, a[6] poor man, and a hanger-on to keep as well! And before he came to me, he used to go in the same way to a government clerk's; he attached himself to him; they were always drinking together; but he, through trouble of some sort, drank himself into the grave. My man was called Emelyan Ilyitch. I pondered and pondered what I was to do with him. To drive him away I was ashamed. I was sorry for him; such a pitiful, God-forsaken creature I never did set eyes on. And not a word said either; he does not ask, but just sits there and looks into your eyes like a dog. To think what drinking will bring a man down to!

"I keep asking myself how am I to say to him: 'You must be moving, Emelyanoushka, there's nothing for you here, you've come to the wrong place; I shall soon not have a bite for myself, how am I to keep you too?'

"I sat and wondered what he'd do when I said that to him. And I seemed to see how he'd stare at me, if he were to hear me say that, how long he would sit and not understand a word of it. And when it did get home to him at last, how he would get up from the window, would take up his bundle—I can see it now, the red-check handkerchief full of holes, with God knows what wrapped up in it, which he had always with him, and then how he would set his shabby old coat to rights, so that it would look decent and keep him warm, so that no holes would be seen—he was a man of delicate feelings! And how he'd open the door and go out with tears in his eyes. Well, there's no letting a man go to ruin like that.... One's sorry for him.

"And then again, I think, how am I off myself? Wait a bit, Emelyanoushka, says I to myself, you've not long to feast with me: I shall soon be going away and then you will not find me.

"Well, sir, our family made a move; and Alexandr Filimonovitch, my master (now deceased, God rest his soul), said, 'I am thoroughly satisfied with you, Astafy Ivanovitch;[7] when we come back from the country we will take you on again.' I had been butler with them; a nice gentleman he was, but he died that same year. Well, after seeing him off, I took my belongings, what little money I had, and I thought I'd have a rest for a time, so I went to an old woman I knew, and I took a corner in her room. There was only one corner free in it. She had been a nurse, so now she had a pension and a room of her own. Well, now good-bye, Emelyanoushka, thinks I, you won't find me now, my boy.

"And what do you think, sir? I had gone out to see a man I knew, and when I came back in the evening, the first thing I saw was Emelyanoushka! There he was, sitting on my box and his check bundle beside him; he was sitting in his ragged old coat, waiting for me. And to while away the time he had borrowed a church book from the old lady, and was holding it wrong side upwards. He'd scented me out! My heart sank. Well, thinks I, there's no help for it—why didn't I turn him out at first? So I asked him straight off: Have you brought your passport, Emelyanoushka?'

"I sat down on the spot, sir, and began to ponder: will a vagabond like that be very much trouble to me? And on thinking it over it seemed he would not be much trouble. He must be fed, I thought. Well, a bit of bread in the morning, and to make it go down better I'll buy him an onion. At midday I should have to give him another bit of bread and an onion; and in the evening, onion again with kvass, with some more bread if he wanted it. And if some cabbage soup were to come our way, then we should both have had our fill. I am no great eater myself, and a drinking man, as we all know, never eats; all he wants is herb-brandy or green vodka. He'll ruin me with his drinking, I thought, but then another idea came into my head, sir, and took great hold on me. So much so that if Emelyanoushka had gone away I should have felt that I had nothing to live for, I do believe.... I determined on the spot to be a father and guardian[8] to him. I'll keep him from ruin, I thought, I'll wean him from the glass! You wait a bit, thought I; very well, Emelyanoushka, you may stay, only you must behave yourself; you must obey orders.

"Well, thinks I to myself, I'll begin by training him to work of some sort, but not all at once; let him enjoy himself a little first, and I'll look round and find something you are fit for, Emelyanoushka. For every sort of work a man needs a special ability, you know, sir. And I began to watch him on the quiet; I soon saw Emelyanoushka was a desperate character. I began, sir, with a word of advice: I said this and that to him. 'Emelyanoushka,' said I, 'you ought to take a thought and mend your ways. Have done with drinking! Just look what rags you go about in: that old coat of yours, if I may make bold to say so, is fit for nothing but a sieve. A pretty state of things! It's time to draw the line, sure enough.' Emelyanoushka sat and listened to me with his head hanging down. Would you believe it, sir? It had come to such a pass with him, he'd lost his tongue through drink and could not speak a word of sense. Talk to him of cucumbers and he'd answer back about beans! He would listen and listen to me and then heave such a sigh. 'What are you sighing for, Emelyan Ilyitch?' I asked him.

"'Oh, nothing; don't you mind me, Astafy Ivanovitch. Do you know there were two women fighting in the street to-day, Astafy Ivanovitch? One upset the other woman's basket of cranberries by accident.'

"'Well, what of that?'

"'And the second one upset the other's cranberries on purpose and trampled them under foot, too.'

"'Well, and what of it, Emelyan Ilyitch?'

"'Why, nothing, Astafy Ivanovitch, I just mentioned it.'

"'"Nothing, I just mentioned it!" Emelyanoushka, my boy, I thought, you've squandered and drunk away your brains!'[9]

"'And do you know, a gentleman dropped a money-note on the pavement in Gorohovy Street, no, it was Sadovy Street. And a peasant saw it and said, "That's my luck"; and at the same time another man saw it and said, "No, it's my bit of luck. I saw it before you did."'

"'Well, Emelyan Ilyitch?'

"'And the fellows had a fight over it, Astafy Ivanovitch. But a policeman came up, took away the note, gave it back to the gentleman and threatened to take up both the men.'

"'Well, but what of that? What is there edifying about it, Emelyanoushka?'

"'Why, nothing, to be sure. Folks laughed, Astafy Ivanovitch.'

"'Ach, Emelyanoushka! What do the folks matter? You've sold your soul for a brass farthing! But do you know what I have to tell you, Emelyan Ilyitch?'

"'What, Astafy Ivanovitch?'

"'Take a job of some sort, that's what you must do. For the hundredth time I say to you, set to work, have some mercy on yourself!'

"'What could I set to, Astafy Ivanovitch? I don't know what job I could set to, and there is no one who will take me on, Astafy Ivanovitch.'

"'That's how you came to be turned off, Emelyanoushka, you drinking man!'

"'And do you know Vlass, the waiter, was sent for to the office to-day, Astafy Ivanovitch?'

"'Why did they send for him, Emelyanoushka?' I asked.

"'I could not say why, Astafy Ivanovitch. I suppose they wanted him there, and that's why they sent for him.'

"A-ach, thought I, we are in a bad way, poor Emelyanoushka! The Lord is chastising us for our sins. Well, sir, what is one to do with such a man?

"But a cunning fellow he was, and no mistake. He'd listen and listen to me, but at last I suppose he got sick of it. As[10] soon as he sees I am beginning to get angry, he'd pick up his old coat and out he'd slip and leave no trace. He'd wander about all day and come back at night drunk. Where he got the money from, the Lord only knows; I had no hand in that.

"'No,' said I, 'Emelyan Ilyitch, you'll come to a bad end. Give over drinking, mind what I say now, give it up! Next time you come home in liquor, you can spend the night on the stairs. I won't let you in!'

"After hearing that threat, Emelyanoushka sat at home that day and the next; but on the third he slipped off again. I waited and waited; he didn't come back. Well, at least I don't mind owning, I was in a fright, and I felt for the man too. What have I done to him? I thought. I've scared him away. Where's the poor fellow gone to now? He'll get lost maybe. Lord have mercy upon us!

"Night came on, he did not come. In the morning I went out into the porch; I looked, and if he hadn't gone to sleep in the porch! There he was with his head on the step, and chilled to the marrow of his bones.

"'What next, Emelyanoushka, God have mercy on you! Where will you get to next!'

"'Why, you were—sort of—angry with me, Astafy Ivanovitch, the other day, you were vexed and promised to put me to sleep in the porch, so I didn't—sort of—venture to come in, Astafy Ivanovitch, and so I lay down here....'

"I did feel angry and sorry too.

"'Surely you might undertake some other duty, Emelyanoushka, instead of lying here guarding the steps,' I said.

"'Why, what other duty, Astafy Ivanovitch?'

"'You lost soul'—I was in such a rage, I called him that—'if you could but learn tailoring work! Look at your old rag of a coat! It's not enough to have it in tatters, here you are sweeping the steps with it! You might take a needle and boggle up your rags, as decency demands. Ah, you drunken man!'[11]

"What do you think, sir? He actually did take a needle. Of course I said it in jest, but he was so scared he set to work. He took off his coat and began threading the needle. I watched him; as you may well guess, his eyes were all red and bleary, and his hands were all of a shake. He kept shoving and shoving the thread and could not get it through the eye of the needle; he kept screwing his eyes up and wetting the thread and twisting it in his fingers—it was no good! He gave it up and looked at me.

"'Well,' said I, 'this is a nice way to treat me! If there had been folks by to see, I don't know what I should have done! Why, you simple fellow, I said it you in joke, as a reproach. Give over your nonsense, God bless you! Sit quiet and don't put me to shame, don't sleep on my stairs and make a laughing-stock of me.'

"'Why, what am I to do, Astafy Ivanovitch? I know very well I am a drunkard and good for nothing! I can do nothing but vex you, my bene—bene—factor....'

"And at that his blue lips began all of a sudden to quiver, and a tear ran down his white cheek and trembled on his stubbly chin, and then poor Emelyanoushka burst into a regular flood of tears. Mercy on us! I felt as though a knife were thrust into my heart! The sensitive creature! I'd never have expected it. Who could have guessed it? No, Emelyanoushka, thought I, I shall give you up altogether. You can go your way like the rubbish you are.

"Well, sir, why make a long story of it? And the whole affair is so trifling; it's not worth wasting words upon. Why, you, for instance, sir, would not have given a thought to it, but I would have given a great deal—if I had a great deal to give—that it never should have happened at all.

"I had a pair of riding breeches by me, sir, deuce take them, fine, first-rate riding breeches they were too, blue with a check on it. They'd been ordered by a gentleman from the country, but he would not have them after all; said they[12] were not full enough, so they were left on my hands. It struck me they were worth something. At the second-hand dealer's I ought to get five silver roubles for them, or if not I could turn them into two pairs of trousers for Petersburg gentlemen and have a piece over for a waistcoat for myself. Of course for poor people like us everything comes in. And it happened just then that Emelyanoushka was having a sad time of it. There he sat day after day: he did not drink, not a drop passed his lips, but he sat and moped like an owl. It was sad to see him—he just sat and brooded. Well, thought I, either you've not got a copper to spend, my lad, or else you're turning over a new leaf of yourself, you've given it up, you've listened to reason. Well, sir, that's how it was with us; and just then came a holiday. I went to vespers; when I came home I found Emelyanoushka sitting in the window, drunk and rocking to and fro.

"Ah! so that's what you've been up to, my lad! And I went to get something out of my chest. And when I looked in, the breeches were not there.... I rummaged here and there; they'd vanished. When I'd ransacked everywhere and saw they were not there, something seemed to stab me to the heart. I ran first to the old dame and began accusing her; of Emelyanoushka I'd not the faintest suspicion, though there was cause for it in his sitting there drunk.

"'No,' said the old body, 'God be with you, my fine gentleman, what good are riding breeches to me? Am I going to wear such things? Why, a skirt I had I lost the other day through a fellow of your sort ... I know nothing; I can tell you nothing about it,' she said.

"'Who has been here, who has been in?' I asked.

"'Why, nobody has been, my good sir,' says she; 'I've been here all the while; Emelyan Ilyitch went out and came back again; there he sits, ask him.'

"'Emelyanoushka,' said I, 'have you taken those new[13] riding breeches for anything; you remember the pair I made for that gentleman from the country?'

"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch,' said he; 'I've not—sort of—touched them.'

"I was in a state! I hunted high and low for them—they were nowhere to be found. And Emelyanoushka sits there rocking himself to and fro. I was squatting on my heels facing him and bending over the chest, and all at once I stole a glance at him.... Alack, I thought; my heart suddenly grew hot within me and I felt myself flushing up too. And suddenly Emelyanoushka looked at me.

"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch,' said he, 'those riding breeches of yours, maybe, you are thinking, maybe, I took them, but I never touched them.'

"'But what can have become of them, Emelyan Ilyitch?'

"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch,' said he, 'I've never seen them.'

"'Why, Emelyan Ilyitch, I suppose they've run off of themselves, eh?'

"'Maybe they have, Astafy Ivanovitch.'

"When I heard him say that, I got up at once, went up to him, lighted the lamp and sat down to work to my sewing. I was altering a waistcoat for a clerk who lived below us. And wasn't there a burning pain and ache in my breast! I shouldn't have minded so much if I had put all the clothes I had in the fire. Emelyanoushka seemed to have an inkling of what a rage I was in. When a man is guilty, you know, sir, he scents trouble far off, like the birds of the air before a storm.

"'Do you know what, Astafy Ivanovitch,' Emelyanoushka began, and his poor old voice was shaking as he said the words, 'Antip Prohoritch, the apothecary, married the coachman's wife this morning, who died the other day——'

"I did give him a look, sir, a nasty look it was; Emelyanoushka understood it too. I saw him get up, go to the bed,[14] and begin to rummage there for something. I waited—he was busy there a long time and kept muttering all the while, 'No, not there, where can the blessed things have got to!' I waited to see what he'd do; I saw him creep under the bed on all fours. I couldn't bear it any longer. 'What are you crawling about under the bed for, Emelyan Ilyitch?' said I.

"'Looking for the breeches, Astafy Ivanovitch. Maybe they've dropped down there somewhere.'

"'Why should you try to help a poor simple man like me,' said I, 'crawling on your knees for nothing, sir?'—I called him that in my vexation.

"'Oh, never mind, Astafy Ivanovitch, I'll just look. They'll turn up, maybe, somewhere.'

"'H'm,' said I, 'look here, Emelyan Ilyitch!'

"'What is it, Astafy Ivanovitch?' said he.

"'Haven't you simply stolen them from me like a thief and a robber, in return for the bread and salt you've eaten here?' said I.

"I felt so angry, sir, at seeing him fooling about on his knees before me.

"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch.'

"And he stayed lying as he was on his face under the bed. A long time he lay there and then at last crept out. I looked at him and the man was as white as a sheet. He stood up, and sat down near me in the window and sat so for some ten minutes.

"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch,' he said, and all at once he stood up and came towards me, and I can see him now; he looked dreadful. 'No, Astafy Ivanovitch,' said he, 'I never—sort of—touched your breeches.'

"He was all of a shake, poking himself in the chest with a trembling finger, and his poor old voice shook so that I was frightened, sir, and sat as though I was rooted to the window-seat.[15]

"'Well, Emelyan Ilyitch,' said I, 'as you will, forgive me if I, in my foolishness, have accused you unjustly. As for the breeches, let them go hang; we can live without them. We've still our hands, thank God; we need not go thieving or begging from some other poor man; we'll earn our bread.'

"Emelyanoushka heard me out and went on standing there before me. I looked up, and he had sat down. And there he sat all the evening without stirring. At last I lay down to sleep. Emelyanoushka went on sitting in the same place. When I looked out in the morning, he was lying curled up in his old coat on the bare floor; he felt too crushed even to come to bed. Well, sir, I felt no more liking for the fellow from that day, in fact for the first few days I hated him. I felt as one may say as though my own son had robbed me, and done me a deadly hurt. Ach, thought I, Emelyanoushka, Emelyanoushka! And Emelyanoushka, sir, went on drinking for a whole fortnight without stopping. He was drunk all the time, and regularly besotted. He went out in the morning and came back late at night, and for a whole fortnight I didn't get a word out of him. It was as though grief was gnawing at his heart, or as though he wanted to do for himself completely. At last he stopped; he must have come to the end of all he'd got, and then he sat in the window again. I remember he sat there without speaking for three days and three nights; all of a sudden I saw that he was crying. He was just sitting there, sir, and crying like anything; a perfect stream, as though he didn't know how his tears were flowing. And it's a sad thing, sir, to see a grown-up man and an old man, too, crying from woe and grief.

"'What's the matter, Emelyanoushka?' said I.

"He began to tremble so that he shook all over. I spoke to him for the first time since that evening.

"'Nothing, Astafy Ivanovitch.'

"'God be with you, Emelyanoushka, what's lost is lost.[16] Why are you moping about like this?' I felt sorry for him.

"'Oh, nothing, Astafy Ivanovitch, it's no matter. I want to find some work to do, Astafy Ivanovitch.'

"'And what sort of work, pray, Emelyanoushka?'

"'Why, any sort; perhaps I could find a situation such as I used to have. I've been already to ask Fedosay Ivanitch. I don't like to be a burden on you, Astafy Ivanovitch. If I can find a situation, Astafy Ivanovitch, then I'll pay it you all back, and make you a return for all your hospitality.'

"'Enough, Emelyanoushka, enough; let bygones be bygones—and no more to be said about it. Let us go on as we used to do before.'

"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch, you, maybe, think—but I never touched your riding breeches.'

"'Well, have it your own way; God be with you, Emelyanoushka.'

"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch, I can't go on living with you, that's clear. You must excuse me, Astafy Ivanovitch.'

"'Why, God bless you, Emelyan Ilyitch, who's offending you and driving you out of the place—am I doing it?'

"'No, it's not the proper thing for me to live with you like this, Astafy Ivanovitch. I'd better be going.'

"He was so hurt, it seemed, he stuck to his point. I looked at him, and sure enough, up he got and pulled his old coat over his shoulders.

"'But where are you going, Emelyan Ilyitch? Listen to reason: what are you about? Where are you off to?'

"'No, good-bye, Astafy Ivanovitch, don't keep me now'—and he was blubbering again—'I'd better be going. You're not the same now.'

"'Not the same as what? I am the same. But you'll be lost by yourself like a poor helpless babe, Emelyan Ilyitch.'

"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch, when you go out now, you lock up your chest and it makes me cry to see it, Astafy Ivanovitch. You'd better let me go, Astafy Ivanovitch, and forgive[17] me all the trouble I've given you while I've been living with you.'

"Well, sir, the man went away. I waited for a day; I expected he'd be back in the evening—no. Next day no sign of him, nor the third day either. I began to get frightened; I was so worried, I couldn't drink, I couldn't eat, I couldn't sleep. The fellow had quite disarmed me. On the fourth day I went out to look for him; I peeped into all the taverns, to inquire for him—but no, Emelyanoushka was lost. 'Have you managed to keep yourself alive, Emelyanoushka?' I wondered. 'Perhaps he is lying dead under some hedge, poor drunkard, like a sodden log.' I went home more dead than alive. Next day I went out to look for him again. And I kept cursing myself that I'd been such a fool as to let the man go off by himself. On the fifth day it was a holiday—in the early morning I heard the door creak. I looked up and there was my Emelyanoushka coming in. His face was blue and his hair was covered with dirt as though he'd been sleeping in the street; he was as thin as a match. He took off his old coat, sat down on the chest and looked at me. I was delighted to see him, but I felt more upset about him than ever. For you see, sir, if I'd been overtaken in some sin, as true as I am here, sir, I'd have died like a dog before I'd have come back. But Emelyanoushka did come back. And a sad thing it was, sure enough, to see a man sunk so low. I began to look after him, to talk kindly to him, to comfort him.

"'Well, Emelyanoushka,' said I, 'I am glad you've come back. Had you been away much longer I should have gone to look for you in the taverns again to-day. Are you hungry?'

"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch.'

"'Come, now, aren't you really? Here, brother, is some cabbage soup left over from yesterday; there was meat in it; it is good stuff. And here is some bread and onion. Come, eat it, it'll do you no harm.'

"I made him eat it, and I saw at once that the man had not[18] tasted food for maybe three days—he was as hungry as a wolf. So it was hunger that had driven him to me. My heart was melted looking at the poor dear. 'Let me run to the tavern,' thought I, 'I'll get something to ease his heart, and then we'll make an end of it. I've no more anger in my heart against you, Emelyanoushka!' I brought him some vodka. 'Here, Emelyan Ilyitch, let us have a drink for the holiday. Like a drink? And it will do you good.' He held out his hand, held it out greedily; he was just taking it, and then he stopped himself. But a minute after I saw him take it, and lift it to his mouth, spilling it on his sleeve. But though he got it to his lips he set it down on the table again.

"'What is it, Emelyanoushka?'

"'Nothing, Astafy Ivanovitch, I—sort of——'

"'Won't you drink it?'

"'Well, Astafy Ivanovitch, I'm not—sort of—going to drink any more, Astafy Ivanovitch.'

"'Do you mean you've given it up altogether, Emelyanoushka, or are you only not going to drink to-day?'

"He did not answer. A minute later I saw him rest his head on his hand.

"'What's the matter, Emelyanoushka, are you ill?'

"'Why, yes, Astafy Ivanovitch, I don't feel well.'

"I took him and laid him down on the bed. I saw that he really was ill: his head was burning hot and he was shivering with fever. I sat by him all day; towards night he was worse. I mixed him some oil and onion and kvass and bread broken up.

"'Come, eat some of this,' said I, 'and perhaps you'll be better.' He shook his head. 'No,' said he, 'I won't have any dinner to-day, Astafy Ivanovitch.'

"I made some tea for him, I quite flustered our old woman—he was no better. Well, thinks I, it's a bad look-out! The third morning I went for a medical gentleman. There was one I knew living close by, Kostopravov by name. I'd made[19] his acquaintance when I was in service with the Bosomyagins; he'd attended me. The doctor come and looked at him. 'He's in a bad way,' said he, 'it was no use sending for me. But if you like I can give him a powder.' Well, I didn't give him a powder, I thought that's just the doctor's little game; and then the fifth day came.

"He lay, sir, dying before my eyes. I sat in the window with my work in my hands. The old woman was heating the stove. We were all silent. My heart was simply breaking over him, the good-for-nothing fellow; I felt as if it were a son of my own I was losing. I knew that Emelyanoushka was looking at me. I'd seen the man all the day long making up his mind to say something and not daring to.

"At last I looked up at him; I saw such misery in the poor fellow's eyes. He had kept them fixed on me, but when he saw that I was looking at him, he looked down at once.

"'Astafy Ivanovitch.'

"'What is it, Emelyanoushka?'

"'If you were to take my old coat to a second-hand dealer's, how much do you think they'd give you for it, Astafy Ivanovitch?'

"'There's no knowing how much they'd give. Maybe they would give me a rouble for it, Emelyan Ilyitch.'

"But if I had taken it they wouldn't have given a farthing for it, but would have laughed in my face for bringing such a trumpery thing. I simply said that to comfort the poor fellow, knowing the simpleton he was.

"'But I was thinking, Astafy Ivanovitch, they might give you three roubles for it; it's made of cloth, Astafy Ivanovitch. How could they only give one rouble for a cloth coat?'

"'I don't know, Emelyan Ilyitch,' said I, 'if you are thinking of taking it you should certainly ask three roubles to begin with.'

"Emelyanoushka was silent for a time, and then he addressed me again[20]—

"'Astafy Ivanovitch.'

"'What is it, Emelyanoushka?' I asked.

"'Sell my coat when I die, and don't bury me in it. I can lie as well without it; and it's a thing of some value—it might come in useful.'

"I can't tell you how it made my heart ache to hear him. I saw that the death agony was coming on him. We were silent again for a bit. So an hour passed by. I looked at him again: he was still staring at me, and when he met my eyes he looked down again.

"'Do you want some water to drink, Emelyan Ilyitch?' I asked.

"'Give me some, God bless you, Astafy Ivanovitch.'

"I gave him a drink.

"'Thank you, Astafy Ivanovitch,' said he.

"'Is there anything else you would like, Emelyanoushka?'

"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch, there's nothing I want, but I—sort of——'

"'What?'

"'I only——'

"'What is it, Emelyanoushka?'

"'Those riding breeches——it was——sort of——I who took them——Astafy Ivanovitch.'

"'Well, God forgive you, Emelyanoushka,' said I, 'you poor, sorrowful creature. Depart in peace.'

"And I was choking myself, sir, and the tears were in my eyes. I turned aside for a moment.

"'Astafy Ivanovitch——'

"I saw Emelyanoushka wanted to tell me something; he was trying to sit up, trying to speak, and mumbling something. He flushed red all over suddenly, looked at me ... then I saw him turn white again, whiter and whiter, and he seemed to sink away all in a minute. His head fell back, he drew one breath and gave up his soul to God."

[21]

A NOVEL IN NINE LETTERS
I
(From Pyotr Ivanitch To Ivan Petrovitch)

Dear Sir and Most Precious Friend, Ivan Petrovitch,

For the last two days I have been, I may say, in pursuit of you, my friend, having to talk over most urgent business with you, and I cannot come across you anywhere. Yesterday, while we were at Semyon Alexeyitch's, my wife made a very good joke about you, saying that Tatyana Petrovna and you were a pair of birds always on the wing. You have not been married three months and you already neglect your domestic hearth. We all laughed heartily—from our genuine kindly feeling for you, of course—but, joking apart, my precious friend, you have given me a lot of trouble. Semyon Alexeyitch said to me that you might be going to the ball at the Social Union's club! Leaving my wife with Semyon Alexeyitch's good lady, I flew off to the Social Union. It was funny and tragic! Fancy my position! Me at the ball—and alone, without my wife! Ivan Andreyitch meeting me in the porter's lodge and seeing me alone, at once concluded (the rascal!) that I had a passion for dances, and taking me by the arm, wanted to drag me off by force to a dancing class, saying that it was too crowded at the Social Union, that an ardent spirit had not room to turn, and that his head ached from the patchouli and mignonette. I found neither you, nor Tatyana Petrovna. Ivan Andreyitch vowed and declared that you would be at Woe from Wit, at the Alexandrinsky theatre.[22]

I flew off to the Alexandrinsky theatre: you were not there either. This morning I expected to find you at Tchistoganov's—no sign of you there. Tchistoganov sent to the Perepalkins'—the same thing there. In fact, I am quite worn out; you can judge how much trouble I have taken! Now I am writing to you (there is nothing else I can do). My business is by no means a literary one (you understand me?); it would be better to meet face to face, it is extremely necessary to discuss something with you and as quickly as possible, and so I beg you to come to us to-day with Tatyana Petrovna to tea and for a chat in the evening. My Anna Mihalovna will be extremely pleased to see you. You will truly, as they say, oblige me to my dying day. By the way, my precious friend—since I have taken up my pen I'll go into all I have against you—I have a slight complaint I must make; in fact, I must reproach you, my worthy friend, for an apparently very innocent little trick which you have played at my expense.... You are a rascal, a man without conscience. About the middle of last month, you brought into my house an acquaintance of yours, Yevgeny Nikolaitch; you vouched for him by your friendly and, for me, of course, sacred recommendation; I rejoiced at the opportunity of receiving the young man with open arms, and when I did so I put my head in a noose. A noose it hardly is, but it has turned out a pretty business. I have not time now to explain, and indeed it is an awkward thing to do in writing, only a very humble request to you, my malicious friend: could you not somehow very delicately, in passing, drop a hint into the young man's ear that there are a great many houses in the metropolis besides ours? It's more than I can stand, my dear fellow! We fall at your feet, as our friend Semyonovitch says. I will tell you all about it when we meet. I don't mean to say that the young man has sinned against good manners, or is lacking in spiritual qualities, or is not up to the mark in some other[23] way. On the contrary, he is an amiable and pleasant fellow; but wait, we shall meet; meanwhile if you see him, for goodness' sake whisper a hint to him, my good friend. I would do it myself, but you know what I am, I simply can't, and that's all about it. You introduced him. But I will explain myself more fully this evening, anyway. Now good-bye. I remain, etc.

P.S.—My little boy has been ailing for the last week, and gets worse and worse every day; he is cutting his poor little teeth. My wife is nursing him all the time, and is depressed, poor thing. Be sure to come, you will give us real pleasure, my precious friend.


STORY 2 ***************************************************************************************************************************************************************


<!-- Bununla birlikte, evlendiğinden iki ay sonra, borä yâzânden hapisle tehdit edilince, Rusya'dan
kaämak zorunda kaldı. Hasta, zavallı ve sârgân olduğu Dresden'den Hombourg'a git-BİRİNCİ
BÜLÇM
Neyse, on beş gân ayrılıktan sonra işte dãndâm. Bizimkiler Roulettenbourg'a (1) geleli âä gân
oldu bile. Beni bâyâk bir sabırsızlıkla beklediklerini sanıyordum ama, yanılmışım. Generalin
son derece rahat, serbest bir hali vardı; tepeden bakarak, bâyâklenerek konuştu benimle, sonra
da kız-kardeşine gãnderdi. Üdânä para almanın bir yolunu buldukları aäıkäa belli. General
benim varlığımdan rahatsız oluyormuş gibi geldi bana. Maria Philippova telaşlı, äok
huzursuzdu; bana birkaä sãzcâk ya sãyledi, ya sãylemedi ama, hemen parayı aldı, saydı ve
sãylediklerimi sonuna kadar dinledi. Me-zeıılzov'ıı, kâäâk Fransızı ve bir de İngiliz! akşam
yemeğine bekliyorlardı. Her zamanki gibi, ellerine para geäer geämez hemen onu-bunu
yemeğe äağırırlar: Moskova alışkanlığınca. Paulinc Alexandrovna beni gãrânce, neden o
kadar uzun zaman ortalarda olmadığımı sordu ve yanıtımı beklemeden äekilip gitti. Elbette ki
bunu bilerek yaptı. Bununla birlikte bir hesaplaşmamız gerek. Äânkâ yâreğime oturdu bu.
Otelin dãrdâncâ katında bana kâäâk bir oda verdiler. GENERALİN MAİYETİNDE
olduğumu biliyorlar burada. Dikkati äekmeyi başarmışlar, apaäık belli. Burada herkes
generali altın babası zengin bir Rus soylusu sanıyor. Yemekten ãnce, daha başka bir sârâ iş
arasında, bozdurmam iäin
(1) Dostoievski ãnce başlık olarak: Roulettenbourg'â seämişti, yayımcısının ısrarı
âzerine bunu değiştirdi.
F. 218
KUMARBAZ
KUMARBAZ
19
bin franklık iki banknot verdi. Onları otelin bârosunda bozdurdum. Şimdi artık, hiä değilse,
tam bir hafta bize milyoner gãzâyle bakacaklar. Gezmeye gãtârmek iäin gidip Micha'yla
Nadia'yı aldım ama, tam merdivendeyken, general beni äağırttı; äocukları nereye
gãtârdâğâmâ ãğrenmesinin uygun olduğunu dâşânmâştâ. Hep sãylerim ya, bu adam
dosdoğru
yâzâme bakamaz; bunu o da isterdi ama, her seferinde ona
ãylesine ısrarlı, yani kâstah bir bakışla yanıt veririm ki, soğukkanlılığını yitirir, eli ayağına
dolaşır.
Tumturaklı, parantezlerle dolu, sonunda iyice Arap saäına dãndârâp bir târlâ iäinden
äıkamadığı bir konuşmayla, äocukları gazinodan oldukäa uzakta, parkta gezdirmem
gerektiğini anlattı. En sonunda da, ãfkelendi ve sert bir sesle bana:
åYoksa, onları belki de rulete gãtârârdânâz.ç dedi. Sonra da: åBağışlayın beni ama,ç diye
ekledi, åhenâz pek aklınız yerinde değil de oyun sizi äekebilir, kendinizi kap-tırabilirsiniz.
Her ne kadar, sizin akıl hocanız değilsem, bãyle bir rolâ âstlenmeye de hiä niyetli olmasam
da, gene de beni lekelememenizi istemek hakkımdır, hani dilim varıp da sãy-leyebilsem...ç
åAma, pekélé biliyorsunuz ki param yok benimç diye yanıt verdim sakin sakin; åkumarda
yitirebilmek iäin insanın parası olmalı.ç
Hafifäe kızaran general:

ÜSize hemen para veririmã diye yanıtladı; bir sÇre Éekmecelerini karıştırdı, defterine baktı:
Bana yÇz yirmi rubleye yakın borcu olduğu ortaya Éıktı.
ÜBu hesabı nasıl kapatacağız?ã diye sÇrdÇrdÇ. ÜBunları "taler"e (1) Éevirmeli. Bakın, şimdilik
şu yÇz taleri alın,
yuvarlak bir hesap olur báylece; gerisini daha sonra veririm.ã
Tek sáz sáylemeden parayı aldım.
ÜSakın benim sázlerimden alınmayın, rica ederim, o kadar alıngansınız ki... Size bu uyarıda
bulımdumsa, bu, denebilir ki, dikkatli olmanızı sağlamak iÉindi; buna da biraz hakkım
vardır...ã
Akşam yemeğinden az ánce, Éocuklarla dánerken atlı, arabalı bir kafileye rastladım.
Bizimkiler bilmem hangi áreni gezmeye gidiyorlardı. Şahane iki araba, gárkemli atlar!
Madeınoiselle Blanche (1), Marie Philippovna ve Pauline'le birlikte arabaların birindeydi;
kÇÉÇk Fransız, İngiliz ve bizim general atla onlara eşlik ediyorlardı. Yoldan gelip geÉenler
onlara bakmak iÉin duruyorlardı; bÇyÇk etki yapmışlar, dikkatleri Çzerlerine Éekmişlerdi; ne
var ki bu general iÉin kátÇ sonuÉ verecek. Ben hesapladım: Benim getirdiğim dárt bin franga,
ádÇnÉ almayı başardıkları aÉıkÉa belli olan parayı da ekleyerek şimdi yaklaşık yedi, sekiz bin
frankları vardı; Madenıoisellc Blanche iÉin bu Éok azdı.
Mile Blanche annesiyle birlikte, bizim kaldığımız otele indi; bizim kÇÉÇk Fransız da orada
kalıyor. Garsonlar ona Sayın Kont diyorlar; Mile Blanche'ın annesi kendine Sayın Kontes
dedirtiyor. Sonunda, kimbilir, belki gerÉekten de kont ve kontestirler, belli olmaz.
Yemekte bir araya geleceğimiz zaman Sayın Kont'un beni tanımayacağından kesinlikle
emindim. Elbette ki, general tanışmamızı, ya da en azından beni ona tanıtmayı aklının ucuna
bile getirmeyecekti; Sayın Kont Rusya'da yaşamıştı, orada
(1) Eski bir gÇmÇş Alman parası. (çeviren)
(1) Konuşmaların akışına bağlı kalarak, yabancı dilden sázcÇkleri italik olarak belirttik.
Yazarın vurgulamak istediği kesimler bÇyÇk hamilerle belirtilmiştir. (çeviren)20
KUMARBAZ
dedikleri gibi, bir "oııtchitel'in (1) ãe ánemsiz bir kişi olduğunu bilir. Hem zaten, .beni Éok iyi
tanır. Ama, şurası bir gerÉek ki, beni yemeğe beklemiyorlardı; general hiÉ kuşkusuz emir
vermeyi unutmuştu, yoksa beni mutlaka otelin tabldotuna gánderirdi. Ben kendiliğimden
geldim ve generalin hiÉ de hoşnut olmayan bakışıyla karşılaştım. Zavallı Marie Philip-povna
bana hemen bir yer gásterdi; ne var ki B. Astley'le karşılaşmam beni bu kátÇ durumdan
kurtardı, olayların zoruyla, ben de onların toplumuna katılmak zorunda kaldım.
Bu garip adamla ilk kez Prusya'da karşılaştım; bir kompartımanda karşılıklı oturuyorduk;
arkadaşlarımın yanına gidiyordum; sonra onu Fransız sınırında, sonra da İsviÉre'de gene
gárdÇm: Demek ki on beş gÇnde iki kez, işte şimdi de Roulettenbourg'da onu yeniden
bulmuştum! Ben ámrÇmde onun kadar utangaÉ bir adam gármedim; aptallığa vardıracak
derecede utangaÉtır, bunu da Éok iyi bilir, ÉÇnkÇ hiÉ de aptal değildir. Zaten son derece sakin
huylu ve pek sevimlidir. Prus-ya'daki ilk karşılaşmamızda onu konuşturmuştum. Bana o yaz
Kuzey Burnu'nu gezdiğini ve Nijni-Novgorod fuarını gármeyi pek arzu ettiğini sáylemişti.
Generalle nasıl ilişki kurduğunu bilmiyorum; Paulinc'e deliler gibi êşık olduğunu sanıyorum.
Paııline iÉeri girince adam pancar gibi kıpkırmızı oldu. Sofrada benim yanımda oturmaktan
pek memnun ve áyle sanıyorum ki daha şimdiden beni yakın bir dostu gibi gárÇyor.
Yemek sırasında kÇÉÇk Fransız aşın derecede kasılıp kurumlandı. Herkese karşı horgárÇyle
ve saygısızca davranıyor. çok iyi anımsarım, Moskova'da gáz boyamaktan pek hoşlanırdı.
Rus maliyesi ve siyasası Çzerine bitmez tÇkenme/, konuşmalar yaptı. General bir-iki kez ona
karşı Éıkmaya yel-
(1) Oıılchitel: Evlerde eskiden genÉleri yetiştiren áğretmen ve eğitici. (çeviren)
KUMARBAZ
21

tendi ama, onun gázÇndeki saygınlığını bÇsbÇtÇn yitirmemek iÉin pek Éekinerek ve belli
belirsiz bir biÉimde.
çok garip bir ruh durumu iÉinde bulunuyordum. Sáylemeye gerek yok: Daha yemeğin
ortasına varmadan kendi kendime şu alışılmış ve ezeli soruyu sormuştum bile: ÜŞu generalin
peşinden ne diye sÇrÇklenip duruyorum, kuzum? Bit hayli zaman var ki onlardan ayrılmış
olmalıydım!ã Arada sırada Pauline Alexandrovna'ya bir gáz atıyordum; onun benimle zerre
kadar ilgilendiği yoktu. En sonunda, sabrım taştı, tepemin tası attı, bir saygısızlık yapmaya
karar verdim.
ànce, pat, diye tepeden inme bir biÉimde, bana soru yáneltilmeden, avaz avaz konuşarak
sáyleşiye katıldım. àzellikle de kÇÉÇk Fransızla dalaşmaya Éalışıyordum. Generale doğru
dándÇm ve bir giriş yapmadan, yÇksek ve anlaşılır bir sesle (hatta áyle sanıyorum ki onun
sázÇnÇ bile kestim), ona bu yaz Rusların hemen hemen tabldotta yemek olanağından yoksun
bulunduklarını belirttim. General şaşkın bakışlarını bana dikti.
ÜEğer kendinize şu kadarcık saygınız varsaã diye sÇrdÇrdÇm, ÜkaÉınılmaz biÉimde
hakaretlere uğrarsınız, aÉık aÉık hakaretlere katlanmalısınız. Paris'te, Rhin kıyılarında ve hatta
İsviÉre'de, lokanta masalarım Polonyalılar ve tıpatıp onların benzeri olan kÇÉÇk Fransızlar
áylesine kapışmışlar ki, eğer Rııssanız, bir tek sázcÇk sáyleme olanağını bulamazsınız bile.ã
Bunları Fransızca sáylemiştim. General şaşırıp kalmış bir durumda bana bakıyordu, kızması
mı, yoksa sadece bu derece kendimden geÉmiş olmama şaşması mı gerektiğini bilemiyordu.
ÜHiÉ kuşkusuz, birisi size bir ders vermiş olmalı!ã dedi kÇÉÇk Fransız horgáren ve ilgisiz bir
tavırla.
ÜParis'te ánce bir Polonyalıyla, sonra da Polonyalıyı destekleyen bir Fransız subayıyla kavga
ettimã diye yanıt ver-22
KUMARBAZ
dini. ÜSonra da, bir monsignor'un kahvesine tÇkÇrmeme ramak kaldığım anlatınca
Fransızların bir bálÇmÇ benden yana oldu.ã
General azametli bir şaşkınlıkla:
ÜTÇkÇrmek mi?ã diye sordu; hafta bakışlarını odanın Éevresinde dolaştırdı. KÇÉÇk Fransız
kuşkulu bir gázle beni sÇzdÇ.
ÜElbette yaã diye yanıt verdim. ÜKırk sekiz saat sÇresince, bizim olay iÉin belki de Roma'ya
bir sıÉramam gerekeceğini sandım, bu nedenle de pasaportumu vize ettirmek amacıyla
Paris'teki Papalık bÇyÇkelÉiliğine gittim. Orada, sıska mı sıska, ellisine merdiven dayamış don
yağı suratlı kÇÉÇk bir papaz karşıladı beni. Beni dinledikten sonra, terbiyeli ama, son derece
soğuk ve sert bir sesle beklememi rica etti. Acelem vardı ama, elbette ki oturdum, cebimden
"Opinıon nationale" gazetesini Éıkarıp, Rusya aleyhine zehir zemberek bir eleştiriyi okumaya
başladım. Bu arada, birisinin yandaki odadan monsignor'un yanına gittiğini işittim; benim
rahibin ona kandilli temennalar yaptığını gárdÇm. İsteğimi yineledim; daha da sert bir sesle,
bana beklememi rica etti. Bir sÇre sonra iÉeri bir ziyaretÉi girdi, bu bir Avusturyalıydı; onu
dinledikten sonra, hemen, hiÉ bekletmeden yukarı gátÇrdÇler. O zaman sinirlendim; ayağa
kalktım, rahibe yaklaşıp, itiraz gátÇrmez bir sesle mademki monsignor gelenleri kabul
ediyordu, benim de işimi yapıverir, dedim. Bunun Çzerine, rahip sonsuz bir şaşkınlık haliyle
dándÇ. Beş para etmez bir Rus nasıl olur da kendini monsignor'un konuklarıyla bir tutar, işte
adamın aklı bunu bir tÇrlÇ almıyordu. Daha kÇstah bir sesle ve bana hakaret edebilmekten
zevk alıyormuş gibi, beni tepeden tırnağa sÇzdÇ ve: ÜMonsignor'un sizin hatırınız iÉin
kahvesinden vazgeÉeceğini sanmıyorsunuzdur, herhalde?ã diye diye haykırdı. Bunun Çzerine
ben de bağırdım, hem de ondan daha da yÇksek sesle: ÜBilin ki sizin monsignor'unuzun

kahvesinin iÉine tÇkÇrÇrÇm ben! Umrumda bile değil! Eğer be-
KUMARBAZ

23
nim pasaport işini bir an ánce bitirmezseniz, onu kendim gidip gárÇrÇm!ã

ÜNasıl! Tam da bir kardinali huzuruna kabul ettiği anda mı!ã diye ciyak ciyak bağıran rahip
dehşetle yanımdan uzaklaştı; hemen kapıya koştu ve beni iÉeri bırakmaktansa álmeyi
yeğlediğini anlatmak iÉin kollarını haÉ gibi iki yana aÉtı. O zaman ben de sapkın mezhepli ve
barbar olduğumu, bÇtÇn piskoposları, kardinalleri, monsignor'ları gecelik kavuğuma
dinletmesini haykırdım yÇzÇne karşı. Kısacası, boyun eğmediğimi gásterdim. Rahip bana
sonsuz kin dolu bir bakış fırlattı, pasaportumu kaptı, yukarı gátÇrdÇ. Bir dakikaya kalmadan,
vizemi almıştım. ÜŞurada, yanımda, gármek ister misiniz?ã
Pasaportumu Éıkarıp papalık vizesini gásterdim. ÜBununla birlikte...ã diye başladı general.
ÜSizi asıl kurtaran, sapkın mezhepli ve barbar olduğunuzu sáylemenizdirã dedi kÇÉÇk Fransız
hafif bir gÇlmeyle. ÜBu hiÉ de aptalca değildi.ã
ÜCanım, elbette ki dut yemiş bÇlbÇl gibi duran, daha da olmazsa, vatanlarını yadsımaya hazır,
dikilip kalan şu sizin Ruslar gibi yapamam ya. HiÉ değilse Paris'te, rahiple dalaşmalarımı
kendilerine anlattığımda, benim oteldeki kimseler bana daha da fazla saygı gásterdiler. Otelin
lokantasında bana karşı en sevimsiz davranan kişi, Éam yarması Polonyalı, arka planda
kayboldu. Bir Fransız avcısının sadece tÇfeğini ateşleyip kurşunlan boşaltmak amacıyla
1812'de silah Éektiği bir adamı iki yıl ánce gárdÇğÇmÇ sáylediğim zaman Fransızlar gık bile
diyemediler. Bu adam o zamanlar on yaşında bir Éocukmuş; ailesi Moskova'dan ayrılmaya
vakit bulamamıştı.ã
ÜOlmaz áyle şey!ã diye patladı kÇÉÇk Fransız; Übir Fransız askeri bir Éocuğa ateş etmez.ã
ÜAma, yine de báyle bir şey olduã diye yanıtladım, Übunu24
KUMARBAZ
KUMARBAZ
25
bana saygıdeğer bir emekli binbaşı anlattı, yanağındaki yara izini de kendi gázÇmle gárdÇm.ã
Fransız ağız kalabalığıyla konuşmaya başladı. General onu desteklemek istedi ama, bir árnek
olarak, 1812'de Fransızlar tarafından tutsak edilen General Perovski'nin (1) Anılarını
okumasını áğÇtledim ona. Sonunda, Marie Philippovna konuşmayı Éevirmek amacıyla başka
bir konuya geÉti. General bana fena halde áfkelenmişti, ÉÇnkÇ Fransızla ben neredeyse avaz
avaz bağırmaya başlıyorduk. Buna karşılık, kavgamız B. Astley' in pek hoşuna gitmişe
benziyordu; sofradan kalkınca kendisiyle birlikte bir kadeh iÉki iÉme ánerisinde bulundu
bana.
Gece, Pauline Alexandrovna'yla istediğim gibi on beş dakika konuşabildim. Sáyleşimizi
gezinti sırasında yaptık. Herkes parktan geÉerek gazinoya gitmişti. Pauline fıskiyenin
karşısındaki sıraya oturdu, Nadia'nın da gidip biraz uzakta ábÇr Éocuklarla oyun oynamasına
izin verdi. Ben de Micha'yı havuzun yanına gánderdim, báylece en sonunda yalnız kalabildik.
BaşlangıÉta, elbette ki, işlerden sáz ettik. Kendisine topu topu yedi yÇz florin verince, Pauline
bir iyice kızdı. Paris' te elmaslarına karşılık en azından iki bin florin ádÇnÉ alabildiğime
kesinlikle inanmıştı.
ÜHer ne pahasına olursa olsun, paraya ihtiyacım var* dedi. ÜNe yapıp edip, mutlaka para
bulmalı, yoksa mahvolurum.ã
Yokluğum sırasında nelerin olup bittiğini sordum ona.
ÜHiÉbir şey olmadı, sadece Petersburg'dan iki haber aldık: ànce, bÇyÇkannenin ağır hasta
olduğunu, iki gÇn sonra da, belki álmÇş olduğunu. Bunları Timothee Petrovitch'den
(1) Dorodino savaşından sonra Fransızlara tutsak dÇşmÇştÇ, Anı-hin o sıralarda Moskova'da
yayınlanmıştı.
áğrendikã diye ekledi Pauline, Üyalan yanlış konuşmayan bir adamdır o. Haberin
doğrulanmasını bekliyoruz.ã
ÜDemek ki burada herkes bekleyiş iÉinde?ã dedim.
ÜEvet, her şey ve herkes; altı aydan beri bundan başka umudumuz kalmadı.ã
ÜSiz de mi bunu umuyorsunuz?ã diye sordum.

ÜOh! Ben onun akrabası filan değilim ki, generalin Çvey kızıyım ben. Ama, eminim,
vasiyetnamesinde beni unutmaz.ã
Üàyle sanıyorum ki elinize bÇyÇk bir miktarda para geÉecek,ã dedim destekleyici bir sesle.
ÜEvet, beni Éok severdi ama, bu gÇvence nereden geliyor, kuzum?ã
ÜBuraya bakınã diye sorusunu soruyla yanıtladım. ÜBana áyle geliyor ki, markimiz sizin
bÇtÇn aile gizlerinizi biliyor, ne dersiniz?ã
ÜBu sizi ilgilendiriyor mu?ã diye soran Pauline bana soğuk ve áfkeli bir halle baktı.
ÜElbette ilgilendirir; eğer yanılmıyorsam, general ondan ádÇnÉ para almanın bir yolunu buldu
bile.ã
ÜTahminleriniz doğru.ã
ÜEğer bÇyÇkanne áykÇsÇnÇ bilmeseydi, ona para verir miydi? Sofrada farkına vardınız mı?
BÇyÇkanneden sáz ederken tam ÇÉ kez ona babouÇnka (1) dedi. Ne sevimli bir iÉtenlik, ne
yakınlık!ã
ÜEvet, hakkınız var. Benim de mirasa konacağımı áğrenir áğrenmez bana evlenme ánerisinde
bulunacak. àğrenmek istediğiniz buydu, değil mi?ã
ÜHenÇz size evlenme ánerisinde bulunma aşamasında mı? Uzun zamandan beri bu işe aday
olduğunu sanıyordum.ã
Pauline:
ÜBáyle olmadığını siz de pekêlê biliyorsunuz!ã diye kar-
(1) BÇyÇkannenin sevecen kÇÉÇltÇlmÇşÇ.
26
KUMARBAZ
şılık verdi áfkeyle. Bir dakika suskunluktan sonra: ÜBu İn-gilize nerede rastladınız?ã diye
sÇrdÇrdÇ.
ÜBu soruyu bana soracağınıza kesinlikle emindim.ã B. Astley'le, yolculuk sırasında, daha
ánceki karşılaşmalarımı ona anlattım.
Üçok Éekingen ve duygusaldır, elbette ki size de deli gibi êşık.ã
Pauline: ÜEvet, bana êşıkã diye yanıt verdi.
'Üästelik Fransızdan da on kez daha zengin. Hem bakalım Fransızın gerÉekten serveti var mı?
Bu hiÉ de kuşku dışı değil.ã
ÜKesinlikle. Bir şatosu var. General dÇn bunu bana doğruladı. Eh, áyleyse, bu size yeterli
mi?ã
ÜSizin yerinizde olsam, İngilizle evlenirdim.ã
ÜNeden?ã diye sordu Pauline.
ÜFransız daha yakışıklı bir genÉ ama, soysuz kopuğun biri; oysa İngiliz dÇrÇst bir adam,
Çstelik de on kez daha zenginã dedim kesin bir sesle.
ÜOrası doğru ama, Fransız marki, daha da kafalıã diye karşılık verdi sakin sakin.
ÜBuna kesinlikle emin misiniz?ã diye sÇrdÇrdÇm aynı tonla.
ÜKesinlikle eminim.ã
Sorularım Pauline'in hiÉ hoşuna gitmiyordu, yanıtının tonu ve garipliğiyle beni áfkelendirmek
istediğini anlıyordum; bunu hemen ona sáyledim.
ÜDoğru, sizi kudurtmak hoşuma gidiyor. Sadece bÇtÇn bu soruları ve varsayımları bana
yáneltmekte bir sakınca gármemiş olmanızla bana bir ádÇn vermeniz gerekiyor.ã
Üİşte ben de istediğim bÇtÇn sorulan size sorma hakkını kendimde gárÇyorumã diye karşılık
verdim sakin sakin, ÜÉÇnkÇ onlara istediğiniz fiyatı ádemeye hazırım ve ÉÇnkÇ artık kendi
yaşamıma hiÉ mi hiÉ ánem vermiyorum.ã
KUMARBAZ
27
Pauline kahkahayla gÇldÇ:

ÜGeÉen gÇn bana, Schlangenberg'de, benim bir tek sázÇm Çzerine kendinizi tepetaklak aşağı
atmaya hazır olduğunuzu sáylediniz ve biz de şáyle bir bin ayak yÇkseklikte bulunuyorduk.
Sadece sáylediklerinizi gerÉekleştirip gerÉekleştirmediğinizi gármek iÉin, bu sázÇ bir gÇn size
sáyleyeceğim ve emin olun ki yÇrekli davranacağım. İşte tam da size onca şeye izin verdiğim
iÉin sizden nefret ediyorum, bir de bana kaÉınılmaz derecede gerekli olduğunuz iÉin daha da
nefret ediyorum. Ama, size gene ihtiyacım var. Demek ki sizin canınızı bağışlamalıyım.ã
Pauline ayağa kalktı. Pek áfkelenmişe benziyordu. Son zamanlarda konuşmalarımızı hep bu
áfke ve kin, yapmacıksız kin havasıyla noktalıyordu.
Durumu aÉıklığa kavuşturmadan gitmemesi isteğiyle ona:
ÜMile. Blanche'm kim olduğunu sormama izin verir misiniz?ã dedim.
ÜBunu pekêlê biliyorsunuz. Yeni hiÉbir şey yok. Mile. Blanche hiÉ kuşkusuz generalle
evlenecek, elbette ki bÇyÇkannenin álÇmÇ doğrulanırsa. çÇnkÇ hem Mile Blanche, hem
annesi, hem de kardeş torunu olduğu marki, hepsi iflês ettiğimizi pekêlê biliyorlar.ã
ÜGeneral de ona Éılgınlar gibi êşık, değil mi?ã
ÜŞimdi sáz konusu olan o değil. Beni dinleyin ve şunu iyice aklınızda tutun: Şu yedi yÇz
florini alın, gidip kumar oynayın; rulette benim iÉin elinizden geldiğince kazanın; şimdi her
ne pahasına olursa olsun bana para gerek.ã
Bu sázlerden sonra, Pauline, Nadia'yı Éağırdı ve bÇtÇn bizim kumpanyanın bulunduğu

gazinoya gitti. Ben soldaki ilk patikaya saptım. Dalgındım, şaşkınlıktan bir tÇrlÇ kendimi kur-
taramıyordum. Bu gidip rulet oynama buyruğu beni adeta ser-semietmişti. Garip ama,

dÇşÇnecek onca konu varken, kendimi bÇtÇnÇyle Pauline'e karşı olan duygularımın
incelenme-30
KUMARBAZ
KUMARBAZ
31
Oyun salonuna girdiğim zaman (ámrÇmde ilk kez), oynamaya karar veremeden bir sÇre
kalakaldım. ästelik, kalabalık da beni durduruyordu. Ama, kimse olmayıp da yalnız başıma
kalsaydım bile, áyle sanıyorum ki oyuna başlayacak yerde Éekilip giderdim. YÇreğim
Éarpıyordu, itiraf ediyorum, soğukkanlılığımı da yitirmiştim. Uzun zamandan beri inanmış ve
karar vermiştim ki Roulettenbourg'a geldiğim gibi oradan gitmeyecektim; yazgımda
kaÉınılmaz olarak kákten ve kesin bir olay meydana gelecekti. Bu gereklidir ve áyle de
olacak. Rulete bağladığım bu umut ne kadar gÇlÇnÉ olursa olsun, kumardan herhangi bir şey
beklemeyi saÉma bulan o genellikle kabul edilen kanıyı daha da gÇlÇnÉ buluyorum. Neden
kumar para bulmanın herhangi bir başka yolundan, sázgelimi ticaretten, daha kátÇ, daha beter
olacakmış? YÇz kişiden birinin kazandığı bir gerÉek. Ama, bÇtÇn bunlar benim umurumda mı,
kuzum!
Her ne olursa olsun, o akşam ánce iyice gázleyip incelemeye, ciddi hiÉbir girişimde
bulunmamaya karar vermiştim. Eğer bir şey olursa, bu sadece rastlantıyla, ayakÇstÇ geÉerken
olabilirdi, umduğum buydu benim. ästelik de, asıl oyunu incelemem gerekiyordu; ÉÇnkÇ
ruletin sayısız tanımlamalarına karşın —bunları her zaman áyle bÇyÇk bir doymazlıkla
okumuşumdur ki—, kendi gázlerimle gármeden kullanılışından hiÉbir şey anlayamazdım.
İlk anda, her şey bana pis, tinsel olarak pis ve iğrenÉ gárÇndÇ. Kumar masalarına onlarca,
hatta yÇzlerce saldıran o aÉgázlÇ ve kaygılı suratlardan sáz etmek istemiyorum. Doğrusu ya,
en kısa zamanda ve olabildiğince Éok kazanma isteğinde kirli hiÉbir şey gármÇyorum.
Kendisine kÇÉÇk paralarla kumar oynadıklarını sáyledikleri zaman: ÜBu daha da beter, ÉÇnkÇ
bu aşağılık bir doymazlıktan gelirã yanıtını veren o karnı tok sırtı pek ahlakÉının fikrini hep
aptalca bulmuşıtm-dur. Sanki aşağılık doymazlıkla, ÇstÇn doymazlık tek ve aynı
şey değilmiş gibi! Bu bir orantı sorunudur. Rothschild'in gázÇnde aşağılık ve adi olan benim
gázÇmde bÇyÇk zenginliktir, kazanÉlarla yitiklere gelince de, kişilerin, sadece rulette değil
ama, her yerde, bir tek nedeni vardır: Kazanmak, ya da başkasından bir şey almak. KazanÉ ve -->